[SOUND] In the previous model,
we covered the expectation
maximization algorithm for
Gaussian mixture model.
In this module, we'll talk about the
general form of expectation maximization,
which will allow you to train almost any
latent variable model you can think of.
So it's going to be intense, but
going to be worth it in the end.
But to start, we will need a few
mathematical tools to work
with inequalities we're going to derive.
So the first tool is
connected to concavity.
And is called Jensen's inequality.
What is concave function?
Well a concave function f is
a function for any two points, a and b.
And for any point in between them,
it has a property that the value
of the function in this point,
the blue point, is greater than or
equal to the value on the segment
that connects f(a) and f(b).
So the orange point.
Or if you put it more formally,
for any two points a and b
and for any weight alpha from 0 to 1,
if you mix these two data points
with the weight alpha,
you will get a point in between them.
And f of this mixture has to be greater
than or equal to the mixture of f's, so
the blue point has to be greater than or
equal to the orange point.
Or yet in other words,
for any two points a and b,
the whole segment
that connects f(a) and f(b)
should lay below the function f.
So if you have a concave function
like logarithm for example,
then you can prove the same
property but for more points.
So for example for any three points,
and for any three weights alpha,
which are non-negative and sum up to 1.
We can prove that this concave function,
so f of mixture of these three
points with weights alpha, is greater
than or equal to the mixture of f's.
And you can generalize this thing.
So first of all, you can call these
alphas probablities because why not.
They are non-negative and sum up to 1.
Let's say that there is a random
variable t which takes three values,
a1, a2 and a3 with probabilities alpha.
And now we can rewrite this inequality.
Saying that f of the expected
value of t is greater than or
equal to the expected value of f of t.
This is just the same thing:
the definition of the expected value.
So the average with weights
being the probabilities.
And this is something
called Jensen's inequality.
Which if you summarize everything, [COUGH]
states that for any concave function f and
for any probabilistic distribution p of t,
the f of the expected
value of t is greater than or
equal to the expected value of f of t.
And this holds true even
if you have three points.
Or if your t takes arbitrary
many points like infinitely many.
And in this case,
your summation can turn out to be an integral,
but the inequality still holds.
So, f of the expected value is greater
than or equal to, expect a value of f for
any concave function f.
And the final mathematical concept
we will need is something called
Kullback-Leibler divergence,
which is a way to measure difference
between two probabilistic distributions.
So say you have two Gaussians.
One of them is located at 0, and
the other one is located at 1.
And both has variance 1, okay?
So how to measure how different
these two Gaussians are?
Well a natural think is to measure
the distance between their parameters,
and it's 1 here, because
the variances are the same, and
the locations differ by 1.
Well it may be a reasonable
measure of distance here, why not?
But let's consider another pair of Gaussians
which have the same locations,
0 and 1, but they have variances 100.
Both of them have variance 100.
In this case, the difference
between parameters is the same.
It's 1.
But intuitively, it seems like
these two Gaussians, the green and
the red one, are much closer to
each other than the first two.
So can we build a better way to measure
difference between Gaussians or
between any probability distributions?
Well, Kullback-Leibler divergence
is something which tries to solve
this problem.
And for example, for
this particular distributions.
The KL divergence between
the first two ones,
the blue and
the orange Gaussian will be 0.5.
And the KL divergence within the green and
red one will be 0.005.
So it reflects our intuition that
the second set of Gaussians are much
closer to each other.
So let's look at the definition of
the Kullback-Leibler divergence.
It may look scary a little bit but
the idea is really simple.
So what do I have here?
It's an integral of q(x)
times logarithm of something.
Well integral of q(x) is just
an expected value of this function.
So here we have an expected value
of logarithm of the ratio, right?
And logarithm of the ratio is trying
to measure how different these
two distributions are at the current
point x in the log scale.
So what we have here is basically how
different these two distributions are at
any data point, at any point of
the x-axis in the log scale.
And then we're taking an expected
value of this quantity.
So we're kind of averaging
across the whole space,
across the whole line,
the line of real numbers.
And we're getting something like
the mean difference between
these two distributions.
So again the definition of
the Kullback-Leibler divergence.
And it has a few properties which
we'll use in the following videos.
So, first of all it's non-symmetric,
right?
If you swap p and q,
then you'll have a different expression.
And this is one of the reasons
why it's not a proper distance
between distributions in
the strict mathematical sense.
But anyway it's useful to measure
some kind of a distance or
difference between distributions.
Other property we may need is [COUGH] that for
any two distributions that coincide,
that are the same,
the KL distance between them is 0.
And this is really easy to see because,
if you substitute p with q,
in the expression above,
you will have expected value of
logarithm of q divided by q.
And q divided by q is 1 at each point.
The logarithm of that is 0.
So we have an expected
value of 0 which is also 0.
So Kullback-Leibler divergence
between a distribution and itself is 0.
And finally, the KL divergence is
non-negative for any of the distributions.
And that's kind of easy to prove because
you can use minus KL divergence.
We can look at the minus KL divergence
which equals to the expected
value of the logarithm of the ratio.
And we can put minus
inside the expected value,
because expected value is something linear.
And finally we can use
the property that
minus logarithm of something is
the logarithm of the inverse.
And now we have expected
value of the logarithm.
And as you may know,
the logarithm is concave function.
It's kind of easy to prove.
You can look it up in Wikipedia or
so, or just believe me.
But anyway, this means that we can
apply Jensen's inequality here.
And Jensen's inequality will
say that expected value of
logarithm is less than or equal to
the logarithm of the expected value.
And finally, the expected value of
p divided by q is just equal to
the integral of q times p divided by q,
where the q vanishes.
And integral of p is always 1 for
any distribution p,
because it's a property
of the distribution.
And finally logarithm of this 1 is 0, so
we have just proved that minus KL
divergence is always non-positive,
which means that KL divergence
itself is non-negative.
To summarize, KL divergence is some way to
compare two distributions to each other.
It's non-symmetric.
It equals to 0 when we compare
the distribution to itself,
and it's always non-negative.
[SOUND]
[MUSIC]